---------------------
Usage examples (API)
---------------------

This examples and usage noted here ca be much better seen on a Jupter Notebook Viewer `here <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/raamana/pyradigm/blob/master/docs/usage.ipynb>`_ 

The following is a html/rst version of the Jupyter notebook in the `pyradigm docs <https://github.com/raamana/pyradigm/blob/master/docs/usage.ipynb>`_ . Downloading, interacting and playing with that notebook is highly recommend over passive reading of this html.

---

Pyradigm is greatly suited for neuroimaging applications (or any other domain), where each sample needs to be uniquely identified with a subject ID (or something similar).

Key-level correspondence across data, labels (1 or 2), classnames ('healthy', 'disease') and the related helps maintain data integrity and improve the provenance, in addition to enabling traceback to original sources from where the features have been originally derived.

Just to given you a concrete examples, let's look at how an ML dataset is handled traditionally.

You have a matrix X of size n x p, with n samples and p features, and a vector y containing the target values (or class labels or class identifiers). This X and y serves as training (and test set) for a classifier like SVM to fit the data X to match y as accurately as possible.

Let's get a little more concrete:

.. code:: python

    import sys, os
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib
    %matplotlib
    %matplotlib inline
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    n = 10 # number of samples
    p = 3  # number of features

    X = np.random.random([n, p]) # random data for illustration
    y = [1]*5 + [2]*5            # random labels ...

    np.set_printoptions(precision=2) # save some screen space
    print('X : \n{}'.format(X))
    print('y : \n{}'.format(y))


.. parsed-literal::

    Using matplotlib backend: TkAgg
    X :
    [[ 0.73  0.85  0.3 ]
     [ 0.63  0.09  0.87]
     [ 0.14  0.71  0.19]
     [ 0.25  0.33  0.08]
     [ 0.8   0.85  0.99]
     [ 0.78  0.76  0.47]
     [ 0.25  0.54  0.18]
     [ 0.57  0.98  0.36]
     [ 0.1   0.1   0.74]
     [ 0.16  0.76  0.53]]
    y :
    [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2]


Almost all the machine learning toolboxes take their input in this form:
X and y, regardless of the original source that produced these features
in the first place.

This is all fine if all you ever wanted to do is to extract some
features, do some machine learning and dispose these features away!

** But this is almost never the case!**

Because it doesn't simply end there.

At a minimum, I often need to know * which samples are misclassified - meaning you need to know what the identifiers are and not simply their row indices in X? * what are the characteristics of those samples? * what classes do they belong to?
  
And all this info needs to be obtained * without having to write lots of code connecting few non-obvious links to disparate sources of data (numerical features X, and sample identifiers in a CSV file) to find the relevant info * without having to track down who or which method originally produced these features * how the previous personnel or grad student organized the whole dataset, if you haven't generated the features yourself from scratch

And if you are like me, you would be thinking about how would you organize your workflow such that the aforementioned tasks can be accomplished with ease.

This data structure attempts to accomplish that with ease. By always organizing the extracted features keyed-in into a dictionary with their *sample id*, and other important info such as *target values* and other identified info. This, by definition, preserves the integrity of the data (inability to incorrectly label samples etc).

No, this data structure doesn't offer the full `provenance tracking <http://rrcns.readthedocs.io/en/latest/provenance_tracking.html>`__, which is quite a challenging problem. But it tries make your life a little easier in your ML workflows.

An example application is shown below, touching upon the following topics:

  -  Motivation
  -  Constructing a dataset
  -  Attributes
  -  Accessing samples
  -  Iteration over samples
  -  Subset selection
  -  Saving/reloading a dataset (Serialization)
  -  Combining datasets and diving them into useful subsets
  -  Portability (e.g. with sklearn)

Improting the necessary modules and our fancy class definition:

.. code:: python

    from pyradigm import MLDataset

We can now instantiate it and give it a description:

.. code:: python

    dataset = MLDataset()
    dataset.description = 'ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.'

.. code:: python

    dataset




.. parsed-literal::

    ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    Empty dataset.



You can see the dataset some description attached to it, however we know
it is empty. This can be verified in a boolean context as shown below:

.. code:: python

    bool(dataset)




.. parsed-literal::

    False



Let's add samples to this dataset which is when this dataset implementation becomes really handy. Before we do that, we will define some convenience routines defined to just illustrate a simple yet common use of this dataset.

.. code:: python

    def read_thickness(path):
        """Dummy function to minic a data reader."""

        # in your actural routine, this might be:
        #   pysurfer.read_thickness(path).values()
        return np.random.random(2)


    def get_features(work_dir, subj_id):
        """Returns the whole brain cortical thickness for a given subject ID."""

        # extension to identify the data file; this could be .curv, anything else you choose
        ext_thickness = '.thickness'

        thickness = dict()
        for hemi in ['lh', 'rh']:
            path_thickness = os.path.join(work_dir, subj_id, hemi + ext_thickness)
            thickness[hemi] = read_thickness(path_thickness)

        # concatenating them to build a whole brain feature set
        thickness_wb = np.concatenate([thickness['lh'], thickness['rh']])

        return thickness_wb


So now we have IO routines to read the data for us. Let's define where
the data will come from:

.. code:: python

    work_dir = '/project/ADNI/FreesurferThickness_v4p3'
    class_set = ['Cntrl', 'Alzmr', 'MCI']
    class_sizes = [15, 12, 18]

This would obviously change for your applications, but this has
sufficient properties to illustrate the point.

Let's look at what methods this dataset offers us:

.. code:: python

    dir(dataset)




.. parsed-literal::

    ['add_classes',
     'add_sample',
     'class_set',
     'class_sizes',
     'classes',
     'data',
     'data_and_targets',
     'del_sample',
     'description',
     'extend',
     'feature_names',
     'get_class',
     'get_feature_subset',
     'get_subset',
     'glance',
     'keys',
     'num_classes',
     'num_features',
     'num_samples',
     'random_subset',
     'random_subset_ids',
     'random_subset_ids_by_count',
     'sample_ids',
     'sample_ids_in_class',
     'save',
     'summarize_classes',
     'train_test_split_ids',
     'transform']



That's a lot of methods of convenience to organize and retrieve dataset.

So let's go through them by their usage sections.



Constructor
-----------

You can see there few methods such as ``add_sample``, ``get_subset`` etc: important method being ``add_sample``, which is key to constructing this dataset. Let's go ahead and some samples:

To contruct a dataset, one typically starts with a list of subject IDs to be added - we create few random lists, each to be considered as a separate class:

.. code:: python

    import random
    from datetime import datetime
    random.seed(datetime.now())

    def read_target_list(class_name, class_size):
        "Generates a random target list. In reality, you would do something like the commented code below."
        target_list = list()
        for idx in range(class_size):
            target_list.append('{}{:04d}'.format(class_name[0],np.random.randint(1000)))

        return target_list


Now we go through each of the above classes, and add each sample that
class to the dataset.

.. code:: python

    for class_index, class_id in enumerate(class_set):
        print('Working on class {:>5}'.format(class_id))

        target_list = read_target_list(class_id,class_sizes[class_index])
        for subj_id in target_list:
            print('\t reading subject {:>15}'.format(subj_id))
            thickness_wb = get_features(work_dir, subj_id)

            # adding the sample to the dataset
            dataset.add_sample(subj_id, thickness_wb, class_index, class_id)


.. parsed-literal::

    Working on class Cntrl
    	 reading subject           C0562
    	 reading subject           C0408
    	 reading subject           C0760
    	 reading subject           C0170
    	 reading subject           C0241
    	 reading subject           C0980
    	 reading subject           C0822
    	 reading subject           C0565
    	 reading subject           C0949
    	 reading subject           C0041
    	 reading subject           C0372
    	 reading subject           C0141
    	 reading subject           C0492
    	 reading subject           C0064
    	 reading subject           C0557
    Working on class Alzmr
    	 reading subject           A0034
    	 reading subject           A0768
    	 reading subject           A0240
    	 reading subject           A0042
    	 reading subject           A0141
    	 reading subject           A0888
    	 reading subject           A0032
    	 reading subject           A0596
    	 reading subject           A0969
    	 reading subject           A0215
    	 reading subject           A0074
    	 reading subject           A0229
    Working on class   MCI
    	 reading subject           M0760
    	 reading subject           M0434
    	 reading subject           M0033
    	 reading subject           M0942
    	 reading subject           M0034
    	 reading subject           M0868
    	 reading subject           M0595
    	 reading subject           M0476
    	 reading subject           M0770
    	 reading subject           M0577
    	 reading subject           M0638
    	 reading subject           M0421
    	 reading subject           M0006
    	 reading subject           M0552
    	 reading subject           M0040
    	 reading subject           M0165
    	 reading subject           M0256
    	 reading subject           M0127


**Nice. Isn't it?**

So what's nice about this, you say? *The simple fact that you are
constructing a dataset as you read the data* in its most elemental form
(in the units of the dataset such as the subject ID in our neuroimaging
application). You're done as soon as you're done reading the features
from disk.

What's more - you can inspect the dataset in an intuitive manner, as
shown below:

.. code:: python

    dataset


.. parsed-literal::

    ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    45 samples, 3 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.
    Class   MCI : 18 samples.



Even better, right? No more coding of several commands to get the
complete and concise sense of the dataset.



Convenient attributes
---------------------

If you would like, you can always get more specific information, such
as:

.. code:: python

    dataset.num_samples




.. parsed-literal::

    45



.. code:: python

    dataset.num_features




.. parsed-literal::

    4



.. code:: python

    dataset.class_set




.. parsed-literal::

    ['MCI', 'Cntrl', 'Alzmr']



.. code:: python

    dataset.class_sizes




.. parsed-literal::

    Counter({'Alzmr': 12, 'Cntrl': 15, 'MCI': 18})



.. code:: python

    dataset.class_sizes['Cntrl']




.. parsed-literal::

    15



If you'd like to take a look data inside for few subjects - shall we
call it a glance?

.. code:: python

    dataset.glance()




.. parsed-literal::

    {'C0170': array([ 0.37,  0.78,  0.5 ,  0.79]),
     'C0241': array([ 0.11,  0.18,  0.58,  0.36]),
     'C0408': array([ 0.49,  0.38,  0.05,  0.82]),
     'C0562': array([ 0.64,  0.59,  0.01,  0.8 ]),
     'C0760': array([ 0.12,  0.51,  0.95,  0.23])}



We can control the number of items to glance, by passing a number to
dataset.glance() method:

.. code:: python

    dataset.glance(2)




.. parsed-literal::

    {'C0408': array([ 0.49,  0.38,  0.05,  0.82]),
     'C0562': array([ 0.64,  0.59,  0.01,  0.8 ])}



Or you may be wondering what are the subject IDs in the dataset.. here
they are:

.. code:: python

    dataset.sample_ids




.. parsed-literal::

    ['C0562',
     'C0408',
     'C0760',
     'C0170',
     'C0241',
     'C0980',
     'C0822',
     'C0565',
     'C0949',
     'C0041',
     'C0372',
     'C0141',
     'C0492',
     'C0064',
     'C0557',
     'A0034',
     'A0768',
     'A0240',
     'A0042',
     'A0141',
     'A0888',
     'A0032',
     'A0596',
     'A0969',
     'A0215',
     'A0074',
     'A0229',
     'M0760',
     'M0434',
     'M0033',
     'M0942',
     'M0034',
     'M0868',
     'M0595',
     'M0476',
     'M0770',
     'M0577',
     'M0638',
     'M0421',
     'M0006',
     'M0552',
     'M0040',
     'M0165',
     'M0256',
     'M0127']





Accessing samples
-----------------

Thanks to elegant implementation, data for a given sample 'M0299' can
simply be obtained by:

.. code:: python

    dataset['M0040']




.. parsed-literal::

    array([ 0.27,  0.52,  0.61,  0.49])



Like a Python dict, it raises an error if the key is not in the dataset:

.. code:: python

    dataset['dlfjdjf']


::


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    KeyError                                  Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-22-4b19d52bac71> in <module>()
    ----> 1 dataset['dlfjdjf']


    ~/dev/pyradigm/pyradigm/pyradigm.py in __getitem__(self, item)
        839             return self.__data[item]
        840         else:
    --> 841             raise KeyError('{} not found in dataset.'.format(item))
        842
        843     def __iter__(self):


    KeyError: 'dlfjdjf not found in dataset.'


A more graceful handling would be to use ``dataset.get`` to control what
value to be returned in case the requested id is not found in the
dataset.

.. code:: python

    dataset.get('dkfjd', np.nan)




.. parsed-literal::

    nan





Iteration
---------

Thanks to builtin iteration, we can easily iterate over all the samples:

.. code:: python

    for sample, features in dataset:
        print("{} : {:>10} : {}".format(sample, dataset.classes[sample], features))


.. parsed-literal::

    C0562 :      Cntrl : [ 0.64  0.59  0.01  0.8 ]
    C0408 :      Cntrl : [ 0.49  0.38  0.05  0.82]
    C0760 :      Cntrl : [ 0.12  0.51  0.95  0.23]
    C0170 :      Cntrl : [ 0.37  0.78  0.5   0.79]
    C0241 :      Cntrl : [ 0.11  0.18  0.58  0.36]
    C0980 :      Cntrl : [ 0.1   0.52  0.79  0.68]
    C0822 :      Cntrl : [ 0.44  0.97  0.06  0.99]
    C0565 :      Cntrl : [ 0.89  0.5   0.89  0.48]
    C0949 :      Cntrl : [ 0.84  0.84  0.51  0.12]
    C0041 :      Cntrl : [ 0.07  0.19  0.68  0.81]
    C0372 :      Cntrl : [ 0.7   0.05  0.67  0.39]
    C0141 :      Cntrl : [ 0.46  0.18  0.69  0.17]
    C0492 :      Cntrl : [ 0.82  0.77  0.07  0.69]
    C0064 :      Cntrl : [ 0.24  0.54  0.36  0.37]
    C0557 :      Cntrl : [ 0.59  0.86  0.1   0.42]
    A0034 :      Alzmr : [ 0.35  0.96  0.41  0.93]
    A0768 :      Alzmr : [ 0.65  0.37  0.7   0.24]
    A0240 :      Alzmr : [ 0.87  0.78  0.1   0.28]
    A0042 :      Alzmr : [ 0.12  0.3   0.35  0.7 ]
    A0141 :      Alzmr : [ 0.85  0.28  0.06  0.74]
    A0888 :      Alzmr : [ 0.85  0.78  0.93  0.7 ]
    A0032 :      Alzmr : [ 0.28  0.41  0.61  0.09]
    A0596 :      Alzmr : [ 0.28  0.15  0.88  0.23]
    A0969 :      Alzmr : [ 0.47  0.37  0.52  0.58]
    A0215 :      Alzmr : [ 0.49  0.7   0.31  0.96]
    A0074 :      Alzmr : [ 0.87  0.7   0.37  0.7 ]
    A0229 :      Alzmr : [ 0.96  0.34  0.59  0.96]
    M0760 :        MCI : [ 0.27  0.22  0.37  0.14]
    M0434 :        MCI : [ 0.26  0.04  0.49  0.92]
    M0033 :        MCI : [ 0.14  0.39  0.71  0.5 ]
    M0942 :        MCI : [ 0.19  0.29  0.42  0.46]
    M0034 :        MCI : [ 0.36  0.54  0.67  0.71]
    M0868 :        MCI : [ 0.29  0.46  0.47  0.83]
    M0595 :        MCI : [ 0.62  0.07  0.66  0.75]
    M0476 :        MCI : [ 0.73  0.97  0.59  0.24]
    M0770 :        MCI : [ 0.81  0.78  0.28  0.61]
    M0577 :        MCI : [ 0.84  0.86  0.94  0.5 ]
    M0638 :        MCI : [ 0.61  0.64  0.94  0.94]
    M0421 :        MCI : [ 0.73  0.16  0.97  0.69]
    M0006 :        MCI : [ 0.76  0.62  0.49  0.03]
    M0552 :        MCI : [ 0.26  0.85  0.13  0.31]
    M0040 :        MCI : [ 0.27  0.52  0.61  0.49]
    M0165 :        MCI : [ 0.03  0.79  0.92  0.79]
    M0256 :        MCI : [ 0.06  0.06  0.69  0.97]
    M0127 :        MCI : [ 0.42  0.11  0.93  0.5 ]


Did you see that? *It's so intuitive and natural!* Such a clean
traversal of dataset.

Thanks to the choice of the OrderedDict() to represent the data, classes
and labels underneath, the order of sample addition is retained. Hence
the correspondence across samples in the dataset not only key-wise (by
the sample id), but also index-wise.



Subject-wise transform
---------------------

Quite often, we are interested in computing some statistics on data for
a given subject (such as mean, or ROI-wise median). Typically this
requires a loop, with some computation and organizing it in a new
dataset! A simple routine pattern of usage, but can't avoided if you are
still fiddling with representing your dataset in medieval matrices! :).

If you organized your dataset in a ``pyradigm``, such computation is
trivial, thanks to builtin implementation of ``transform`` method. The
mean value for each subject can be computed and organized in a new
dataset, with an intuitive and single line:

.. code:: python

    mean_data = dataset.transform(np.mean)
    mean_data.description = 'mean values per subject'
    mean_data




.. parsed-literal::

    mean values per subject
    45 samples, 3 classes, 1 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.
    Class   MCI : 18 samples.



As the transform accepts an arbitrary callable, we could do many more
sophisticated things, such as access the subset of features e.g.
cortical thickness for a particular region of interest (say posterior
cingulate gyrus).

.. code:: python

    # let's make a toy function to return the indices for the ROI
    def get_ROI_indices(x): return x[:3]

Using this "mask" function, we can easily obtain features for an ROI

.. code:: python

    pcg = dataset.transform(get_ROI_indices)

We can verify that the new dataset does indeed have only 3 features, for
the same subjects/classes:

.. code:: python

    pcg




.. parsed-literal::

    None
    ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    45 samples, 3 classes, 3 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.
    Class   MCI : 18 samples.



.. code:: python

    pcg.num_features




.. parsed-literal::

    3



Let's make a bar plot with the just computed numbers:

.. code:: python

    data, lbl, keys = pcg.data_and_targets()

.. code:: python

    n, bins, patches = plt.hist(data)



.. image:: usage_files/usage_70_0.png


Remember as the original source of data was random, this has no units,
property or meaning!



Subset selection
----------------

In addition to the structured way of obtaining the various properties of
this dataset, this implementation really will come in handy when you
have to slice and dice the dataset (with large number of classes and
features) into smaller subsets (e.g. for binary classification). Let's
see how we can retrieve the data for a single class:

.. code:: python

    ctrl = dataset.get_class('Cntrl')

That's it, obtaining the data for a given class is a simple call away.

Now let's see what it looks like:

.. code:: python

    ctrl




.. parsed-literal::


     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    15 samples, 1 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.



Even with updated description automatically, to indicate its history.
Let's see some data from controls:

.. code:: python

    ctrl.glance(2)




.. parsed-literal::

    {'C0408': array([ 0.49,  0.38,  0.05,  0.82]),
     'C0562': array([ 0.64,  0.59,  0.01,  0.8 ])}



We can also query a random subset of samples for manual inspection or
cross-validation purposes. For example:

.. code:: python

    random_subset = dataset.random_subset(perc_in_class=0.3)
    random_subset




.. parsed-literal::


     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    12 samples, 3 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 4 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 3 samples.
    Class   MCI : 5 samples.



You can see which samples were selected:

.. code:: python

    random_subset.sample_ids




.. parsed-literal::

    ['C0562',
     'C0565',
     'C0372',
     'C0492',
     'A0240',
     'A0032',
     'A0229',
     'M0034',
     'M0770',
     'M0552',
     'M0165',
     'M0127']



You can verify that it is indeed random by issuing another call:

.. code:: python

    # supplying a new seed everytime to ensure randomization
    from datetime import datetime
    dataset.random_subset(perc_in_class=0.3).sample_ids




.. parsed-literal::

    ['C0562',
     'C0822',
     'C0949',
     'C0141',
     'A0034',
     'A0141',
     'A0032',
     'M0434',
     'M0942',
     'M0868',
     'M0421',
     'M0552']



Let's see how we can retrieve specific samples by their IDs (for which there are many use cases):


.. code:: python

    data = dataset.get_subset(dataset.sample_ids[1:20])
    data




.. parsed-literal::


     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    19 samples, 2 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 14 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 5 samples.



So as simple as that.

Cross-validation
================

If you would like to develop a variant of cross-validation, and need to
obtain a random split of the dataset to obtain training and test sets,
it is as simple as:

.. code:: python

    train_set, test_set = dataset.train_test_split_ids( train_perc = 0.5)

This method returns two sets of sample ids corresponding to training set
(which 50% of samples from all classes in the dataset) and the rest in
test\_set. Let's see what they have:

.. code:: python

    train_set, test_set




.. parsed-literal::

    (['C0760',
      'C0822',
      'C0565',
      'C0170',
      'C0562',
      'C0141',
      'C0041',
      'A0768',
      'A0888',
      'A0032',
      'A0969',
      'A0141',
      'A0034',
      'M0434',
      'M0421',
      'M0577',
      'M0256',
      'M0127',
      'M0033',
      'M0760',
      'M0476',
      'M0165'],
     ['M0040',
      'A0240',
      'C0241',
      'C0492',
      'A0074',
      'A0042',
      'M0942',
      'M0595',
      'M0006',
      'C0372',
      'C0064',
      'C0557',
      'M0552',
      'M0034',
      'C0408',
      'C0980',
      'A0229',
      'C0949',
      'A0596',
      'M0770',
      'A0215',
      'M0868',
      'M0638'])



We can also get a train/test split by specifying an exact number of
subjects we would like from each class (e.g. when you would like to
avoid class imbalance in the training set):

.. code:: python

    train_set, test_set = dataset.train_test_split_ids( count_per_class = 3)

Let's see what the training set contains - we expect 3*3 =9 subjects :

.. code:: python

    train_set




.. parsed-literal::

    ['C0557',
     'C0041',
     'C0949',
     'A0768',
     'A0888',
     'A0229',
     'M0165',
     'M0476',
     'M0040']



We can indeed verify that is the case, by creating a new smaller dataset
from that list of ids and getting a summary:

.. code:: python

    training_dataset = dataset.get_subset(train_set)
    training_dataset




.. parsed-literal::


     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    9 samples, 3 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 3 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 3 samples.
    Class   MCI : 3 samples.



Another programmatic way to look into different classes is this:

.. code:: python

    class_set, label_set, class_sizes = training_dataset.summarize_classes()
    class_set, label_set, class_sizes




.. parsed-literal::

    (['MCI', 'Cntrl', 'Alzmr'], [2, 0, 1], array([ 3.,  3.,  3.]))



which returns all the classes that you could iterative over.

Using these two lists, we can easily obtain subset datasets, as
illustrated below.

.. code:: python

    dataset




.. parsed-literal::

    ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    45 samples, 3 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.
    Class   MCI : 18 samples.



.. code:: python

    binary_dataset = dataset.get_class(['Cntrl','Alzmr'])
    binary_dataset




.. parsed-literal::


     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    27 samples, 2 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.



How about selecting a subset of features from all samples?

.. code:: python

    binary_dataset.get_feature_subset(range(2))




.. parsed-literal::

    Subset features derived from:

     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    27 samples, 2 classes, 2 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.



**Great.** Isn't it? You can also see the two-time-point history
(initial subset in classes, followed by a subset in features).



Serialization
-------------

Once you have this dataset, you can save and load these trivially using
your favourite serialization module. Let's do some pickling:

.. code:: python

    out_file = os.path.join(work_dir,'binary_dataset_Ctrl_Alzr_Freesurfer_thickness_v4p3.MLDataset.pkl')
    binary_dataset.save(out_file)

That's it - it is saved.

Let's reload it from disk and make sure we can indeed retrieve it:

.. code:: python

    reloaded = MLDataset(filepath=out_file) # another form of the constructor!

.. code:: python

    reloaded




.. parsed-literal::


     Subset derived from: ADNI1 baseline: cortical thickness features from Freesurfer v4.3, QCed.
    27 samples, 2 classes, 4 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.



We can check to see they are indeed one and the same:

.. code:: python

    binary_dataset == reloaded




.. parsed-literal::

    True





Dataset Arithmetic
------------------

You might wonder how can you combine two different types of features (
thickness and shape ) from the dataset. Piece of cake, see below ...

To concatenat two datasets, first we make a second dataset:

.. code:: python

    dataset_two = MLDataset(in_dataset=dataset) # yet another constructor: in its copy form!

How can you check if they are "functionally identical"? As in same keys,
same data and classes for each key... Easy:

.. code:: python

    dataset_two == dataset




.. parsed-literal::

    True



Now let's try the arithmetic:

.. code:: python

    combined = dataset + dataset_two


.. parsed-literal::

    Identical keys found. Trying to horizontally concatenate features for each sample.


Great. The add method recognized the identical set of keys and performed
a horiz cat, as can be noticed by the twice the number of features in
the combined dataset:

.. code:: python

    combined




.. parsed-literal::

    45 samples, 3 classes, 8 features.
    Class Cntrl : 15 samples.
    Class Alzmr : 12 samples.
    Class   MCI : 18 samples.



We can also do some removal in similar fashion:

.. code:: python

    smaller = combined - dataset


.. parsed-literal::

    C0562 removed.
    C0408 removed.
    C0760 removed.
    C0170 removed.
    C0241 removed.
    C0980 removed.
    C0822 removed.
    C0565 removed.
    C0949 removed.
    C0041 removed.
    C0372 removed.
    C0141 removed.
    C0492 removed.
    C0064 removed.
    C0557 removed.
    A0034 removed.
    A0768 removed.
    A0240 removed.
    A0042 removed.
    A0141 removed.
    A0888 removed.
    A0032 removed.
    A0596 removed.
    A0969 removed.
    A0215 removed.
    A0074 removed.
    A0229 removed.
    M0760 removed.
    M0434 removed.
    M0033 removed.
    M0942 removed.
    M0034 removed.
    M0868 removed.
    M0595 removed.
    M0476 removed.
    M0770 removed.
    M0577 removed.
    M0638 removed.
    M0421 removed.
    M0006 removed.
    M0552 removed.
    M0040 removed.
    M0165 removed.
    M0256 removed.
    M0127 removed.


.. parsed-literal::

    /Users/Reddy/dev/pyradigm/pyradigm/pyradigm.py:1169: UserWarning: Requested removal of all the samples - output dataset would be empty.
      warnings.warn('Requested removal of all the samples - output dataset would be empty.')


Data structure is even producing a warning to let you know the resulting
output would be empty! We can verify that:

.. code:: python

    bool(smaller)




.. parsed-literal::

    False





Portability
-----------

This is all well and good. How does it interact with other packages out
there, you might ask? It is as simple as you can imagine:

.. code:: python

    from sklearn import svm
    clf = svm.SVC(gamma=0.001, C=100.)

.. code:: python

    data_matrix, target, sample_ids = binary_dataset.data_and_targets()
    clf.fit(data_matrix, target)




.. parsed-literal::

    SVC(C=100.0, cache_size=200, class_weight=None, coef0=0.0,
      decision_function_shape='ovr', degree=3, gamma=0.001, kernel='rbf',
      max_iter=-1, probability=False, random_state=None, shrinking=True,
      tol=0.001, verbose=False)



There you have it, a simple example to show you the utility and convenience of this dataset.

*Thanks for checking it out.*


*I would appreciate if you could give me feedback on improving or sharpening it further.*
